---
title: How to avoid scams
layout: tutorial
lang: en
os_unspecific: true
---

# How to avoid scams

Scammers use different tactics to get the elderly to fall victim to their
schemes. They can be friendly, sympathetic and willing to help in some cases or
use fear tactics in others. The tactic used is generally dependent upon the type
of situation.

## Top scams

- **Medicare** — In scams involving Medicare, scammers pose as Medicare
  representatives to get seniors to give them their personal information, such
  as their Medicare identification number. The fraudster uses this information
  to bill Medicare for bad things and steals the money.

- **Fake prescription drugs** — As prices for prescription drugs increase,
  seniors look the internet to find cheaper prices for their medications.
  Unfortunately, scammers set up websites selling fake medicines that may not
  help at all with their illnesses and may worsen it.

- **Telephones** — Phone scams are the most common scams used against the
  elderly. Scammers might get seniors to wire or send them money by claiming to
  be a family member who is in trouble and needs money. They might also solicit
  money from the elderly by posing as a fake charity, especially after a natural
  disaster.

- **Internet** — Elderlies may be tricked into downloading fake anti-virus
  software that allows scammers access to personal information on their
  computers. Seniors might also respond to phishing emails sent by scammers
  asking them to update their bank or credit card information on a phony
  website.

- **Investments** — Many seniors plan for retirement or manage their savings
  after they finish working. Scammers take advantage of victims by posing as
  financial advisors to get access to their retirement funds and savings. Once
  they have access to the funds, they take their money and run.

- **4D or TOTO scams** — Scammers would inform elderlies that they have won
  money but must pay a fee to obtain the prize. Scammers send a fake check to
  the senior to deposit in their bank account. Meanwhile, the victim has sent
  the scammer money. The victim soon realizes that he was scammed when the check
  doesn’t activate.

## How to protect yourself

### Be alert to the fact that scams exist.

Remember, if it looks too good to be true, it probably is.

### Know who you're dealing with.

If you've only ever met someone online or are unsure of the legitimacy of a
business, take some time to do a bit more research. Do a Google image search on
photos or search the internet for others who may have had dealings with them. If
a message or email comes from a friend and it seems unusual or out of character
for them, contact your friend directly to check that it was really them that
sent it.

### Do not open suspicious links

Do not open suspicios texts, pop-up windows or click on links or attachments in
emails – delete them: If unsure, verify the identity of the contact through an
independent source such as a phone book or online search. Don't use the contact
details provided in the message sent to you.

### Don't respond to phone calls about your computer asking for remote access

Hang up instead, even if they mention a well-known company. Scammers will often
ask you to turn on your computer to fix a problem or install a free upgrade,
which is actually a virus which will give them your passwords and personal
details.

### Keep your personal details secure.

Put a lock on your mailbox and shred your bills and other important documents
before throwing them out. Keep your passwords and pin numbers in a safe place.
Be very careful about how much personal information you share on social media
sites. Scammers can use your information and pictures to create a fake identity
or to target you with a scam.

### Keep your mobile devices and computers secure.

Always use password protection, don’t share access with others update security
software and back up content. Protect your WiFi network with a password and
avoid using public computers or WiFi hotspots to access online banking or
provide personal information.

### Choose your passwords carefully.

Choose passwords that would be difficult for others to guess and update them
regularly. A strong password should include a mix of upper and lower case
letters, numbers and symbols. Don’t use the same password for every
account/profile, and don’t share your passwords with anyone.

### Review your privacy and security settings on social media.

If you use social networking sites, such as Facebook, be careful who you connect
with and learn how to use your privacy and security settings to ensure you stay
safe. If you recognise suspicious behaviour, clicked on spam or have been
scammed online, take steps to secure your account and be sure to report it.

### Beware of any requests for your details or money.

Never send money or give credit card details, online account details or copies
of personal documents to anyone you don’t know or trust. Don't agree to transfer
money or goods for someone else: money laundering is a criminal offence.

### Be wary of unusual payment requests.

Scammers will often ask you to use an unusual payment method, including
preloaded debit cards, gift cards, iTunes cards or virtual currency such as
Bitcoin.

### Be careful when shopping online.

Beware of offers that seem too good to be true, and always use an online
shopping service that you know and trust.

### Don't trust strangers

Especially those seeking personal information and money.

## Fake news

1. Check the source Look at the website where the story comes from. Does it look
   real? Is the text well written? Are there a variety of other stories or is it
   just one story? Fake news websites often use addresses that sound like real
   newspapers, but don't have many real stories about other topics. If you
   aren't sure, click on the 'About' page and look for a clear description of
   the organisation.
2. Check the story is in other places Probably the best way to check if the
   piece of news is fake or not. Look to see if the story you are reading is on
   other news sites that you know and trust. If you do find it on many other
   sites, then it probably isn't fake (although there are some exceptions), as
   many big news organisations try to check their sources before they publish a
   story.
3. Look for other signs There are other techniques that fake news uses. These
   include using ALL CAPS and lots of ads that pop up when you click on a link.
   Also, think about how the story makes you feel. If the news story makes you
   angry, it's probably designed to make you angry.

## Conclusion

Hopefully the aforementioned tips above will help you avoid common scams as well
as falling for fake news. Stay Safe.
